Add getting started chapter (#542)
hpcugent/vsc_user_docs: mkdocs/docs/HPC/getting_started.md

# Getting Started

> Welcome to the "Getting Started" guide. This chapter will lead you through the initial steps of logging into the HPC-system and submitting your very first job. We'll also walk you through the process step by step using a practical example.

Reviewer: use `{{ hpcinfra }}` template instead of `HPC-system`

> In addition to this chapter, you might find these  [slides](https://www.ugent.be/hpc/en/training/2023/introhpc202306) to be useful resources.

Reviewer: avoid pointing to training session of a specific date, better point to https://www.ugent.be/hpc/en/training/introhpcugent-recording instead (which tells you where to find the slides)

> Before proceeding, read [the introduction to HPC](introduction.md) to gain an understanding of the HPC infrastructure and its terminology.

Reviewer: use `{{ hpcinfra }}` template

### Getting Access

> To get access, visit <https://docs.hpc.ugent.be/account>.

Reviewer: use `account.md` link?

> If you have not used linux before, now would be a good time to follow our [Linux Tutorial]().

Reviewer: `linux` -> `Linux`, and actual link is missing (`linux-tutorial.md`)?

  
#### A typical workflow looks like this:

1.  Connect to the login nodes 

> 3.  Transfer your files to the cluster 

Reviewer: `2.` ;)

`cluster` -> `{{ hpcinfra }}`

3.  Optional: compile your code and test it 
4.  Create a job script and submit your job
5.  Wait for job to be executed
6.  Study the results generated by your jobs, either on the cluster or
    after downloading them locally.

We will walk through an illustrative workload to get you started. In this example, our objective is to train a deep learning model for recognizing hand-written digits (MNIST dataset).

> See the [example](https://github.com/EESSI/eessi-demo/tree/main/TensorFlow).

Reviewer: We should copy the example in a subdirectory of this repo, and point to that location instead, since the script in `EESSI/eessi-demo` may change in ways the cause trouble in these docs here.

### Getting Connected

There are two options to connect

> - Using a terminal(ssh) (for power users) (see [First Time connection to the HPC infrastructure](connecting.md#first-time-connection-to-the-hpc-infrastructure))

Reviewer: `terminal(ssh)` -> `terminal to connect via SSH (for power users)`

- [Using the HPC-Ugent web portal](web_portal.md#using-the-hpc-ugent-web-portal)

{%- if OS == windows %}

> Considering your operating system is **{{OS}}**, it's recommented to utilize the UGent web portal. This platform offers a convenient way to upload files and gain shell access.

Reviewer: `recommented` -> `recommended`

```suggestion
Considering your operating system is **{{OS}}**, it's recommended to use the UGent web portal.
This platform offers a convenient way to upload files and gain shell access to the {{ hpcinfra }} from a standard web browser (no software installation or configuration required).
```

> Ensure you can get to a shell before proceeding with the next steps.

Reviewer: `Ensure` -> `Make sure`

> See [shell access](web_portal.md#shell-access) when using the ugent portal or

Reviewer: `ugent portal or` -> `web portal, or`

> [connection to the hpc infrastructur](connecting.md#first-time-connection-to-the-hpc-infrastructure) when using a terminal.

Reviewer: `infrastructur` -> `infrastructure`

!!! Info

    When having problems see the [connection issues](troubleshooting.md#sec:connecting-issues) section on the [troubleshooting page](troubleshooting.md).

{%- else %}

> Considering your operating system is **{{OS}}**, it's recommented to make use of a terminal with ssh to get the most flexibility. 

Reviewer: ```suggested
Considering your operating system is **{{OS}}**, it's recommended to make use of a terminal with SSH to get the most flexibility.
```

Reviewer: I'd say this is true for Linux users, but maybe not for macOS - I'm sure there's many researchers who are using macOS who have no idea on how to use a terminal...

Assuming you've already generated  SSH keys in the previous step ([Getting Access](#getting-access)), you should now be able to login by running the following command:

<pre><code>ssh {{userid}}@{{loginnode}}</code></pre>

!!! Warning
    

>     replace <b>{{userid}}</b> with your id (see <https://account.vscentrum.be>)

Reviewer: `replace` -> `Replace`

`id` -> `VSC account id`

!!! Info

    When having problems see the [connection issues](troubleshooting.md#sec:connecting-issues) section on the [troubleshooting page](troubleshooting.md).

!!! Info

>     You can also still use the ugent web portal (see [shell access on web portal](web_portal.md#shell-access))

Reviewer: `ugent web portal` -> `web portal`

    

{%- endif %}

### Transfer your files

> Now that you can login, it's time to transfer files from your local pc to your **Home Directory** on a cluster.

Reviewer: `pc` -> `computer`

> Get [TensorFlow-2.x_mnist-test.py](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/EESSI/eessi-demo/main/TensorFlow/TensorFlow-2.x_mnist-test.py) 

Reviewer: `Get` -> `Download`

> and [run.sh](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/EESSI/eessi-demo/main/TensorFlow/run.sh) from the [example](https://github.com/EESSI/eessi-demo/tree/main/TensorFlow) on your local machine.

Reviewer: `on your local machine` -> `to your computer`

{%- if OS == windows %}

> The [HPC-Ugent web portal](https://login.hpc.ugent.be) provides a filebrowser that allows uploading files.

Reviewer: `filebrowser` -> `file browser`

For more information see the [file browser section](web_portal.md#file-browser).

> Upload the two files to your **Home Directory** and go back to your shell.

Reviewer: `the two files` -> "both files (`run.sh` and `tensorflow-mnist.py`)"

!!! Info

    As an alternative, you can use WinSCP (see [our section](connecting.md#winscp))

{%- else %}

On your local machine you can run:
<pre><code>wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/EESSI/eessi-demo/main/TensorFlow/TensorFlow-2.x_mnist-test.py

> wget https://raw.githubusercontent.com/EESSI/eessi-demo/main/TensorFlow/run.sh

Reviewer: I think it's safer to assume that `curl` is there than `wget`, so use `curl -OL <url>` ?

</code></pre>

> Now using `scp` the files can be copied from your local host to your *home directory* (~) on the remote host (HPC).

Reviewer: `Now using scp` -> "Using the `scp` command"

use code formatting for `~`

<pre><code>scp TensorFlow-2.x_mnist-test.py run.sh {{userid}}{{ loginnode }}:~ </code></pre>
<pre><code>ssh  {{userid}}@{{ loginnode }} </code></pre>

!!! Info

    For more information about transfering files or `scp`, see [tranfer files from/to hpc](connecting.md#transfer-files-tofrom-the-hpc).

{%- endif %}

> When running `ls` on your HPC shell, you should see the two files listed:

Reviewer: in your session on the `{{ hpcinfra }}`

```shell
$ ls
run.sh TensorFlow-2.x_mnist-test.py
```

!!! Warning

    When you do not see these files, make sure you uploaded the files to your **Home Directory**.

### Submitting a job

> Jobs are submitted and executed using job scripts. In our case **run.sh**.

Reviewer: In our case `run.sh` can be used as a (very minimal) job script.

> A job script is a shell script, a text file that specifies the resources, software that is used (via module load) and the steps that should be done for the calculation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A job script is a shell script, a text file that specifies the resources,
the software that is used (via `module load` statements),
and the steps that should be executed to run the calculation.
```

Our job script looks like this:

<center>-- run.sh --</center>

```bash
#!/bin/bash

> module load TensorFlow/2.3.1-foss-2020a-Python-3.8.2

Reviewer: use a more recent version of TensorFlow (and check that the Python script still works):

```
module load TensorFlow/2.11.0-foss-2022a
```

Somewhere we should add a warning that clarifies that we're running a CPU-only TensorFlow calculation here, which is a bit atypical (since TensorFlow is usually run on GPUs because then it's a lot faster).
That also provides an opportunity to point to the chapter on using the GPU clusters.

time python TensorFlow-2.x_mnist-test.py

```

> <sub>As you can see this job script will run the python program: **TensorFlow-2.x_mnist-test.py**</sub>

Reviewer: `python program` -> `Python script`

> The jobs you submit are per default executed on **cluser/{{defaultcluster}}**, you can swap cluster by the following command.

Reviewer: `swap cluster` -> `swap to another cluster`

+ include pointer to https://www.ugent.be/hpc/en/infrastructure ?

> <pre><code>module swap cluster/{{othercluster}}</code></pre>

Reviewer: This is a good place to link to the chapter on the debug/interactive cluster, and recommending to use that (since there's no waiting time there when using a limited amount of resources).

This job script can now be submitted to the cluster's job system for execution, using the qsub (**q**ueue **sub**mit) command:

```shell
$ qsub run.sh
{{jobid}}
```

> This command returns a job identifier (*{{jobid}}*) on the HPC cluster. this is a unique identifier for the job and can be used to monitor and manage your job.

Reviewer: `this is` -> `This is`
`and can be used` -> `which can be used`

!!! Warning
 

>     Please take note that the module commands exclusively modify environment variables. For instance, using `module swap cluster/{{othercluster}}` will instruct `qsub` to carry out the task within the {{othercluster}} cluster. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
P{lease take note that the module commands exclusively modify environment variables. For instance, using `module swap cluster/{{othercluster}}` will instruct `qsub` to submit the job to the {{othercluster}} cluster, but our active shell session is still running on the login node.
```

>     It's important to understand that while these commands affect jobs, they do not alter the context of commands executed directly in your shell. These commands will still operate on your login cluster: {{defaultcluster}}.

Reviewer: This is not really correct, there's no "login cluster", only "login nodes" and a "default cluster".

I would change it to:

```suggestion
It is important to understand that while `module` commands affect your session environment, they do not change *where* the commands you are running are being executed: they will still be run on the login node you are on. When submitting a job script, the commands *in* the job script will be run on a workernode of the cluster the job was submitted to (like `{{defaultcluster}}`).

For detailed information about `module` commands, read the [running batch jobs](running_batch_jobs.md) chapter.

### Wait for job to be executed

Your job is first put into a queue before being executed, so it can take a while.
(see [when will my job start?](running_batch_jobs.md#when-will-my-job-start) for scheduling policy)

You can get an overview of the active jobs using the `qstat` command:
<pre><code>$ qstat
Job ID     Name             User            Time Use S Queue
---------- ---------------- --------------- -------- - -------

> {{jobid}}     run.sh           {{userid}}        0:00:00  Q doduo

Reviewer: `doduo` -> `{{othercluster}}`?

</code></pre> 

Read [this section](running_batch_jobs.md#monitoring-and-managing-your-jobs) on how to interpret the output.

### Inspect your results

> When your job finishes it generates 2 output files: For *stdout* and *stderr*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When your job finishes it generates 2 output files:
* One for normal output messages (*stdout* output channel);
* One for warning and error messages (*stderr output channel);
See also <link to Linux tutorial on stdout/stderr>.

By default located in the directory where you issued qsub.

In our example when running <code>ls</code> in the current directory you should see 2 new files:
 

> - **run.sh.e{{jobid}}**: stderr

Reviewer: `stderr` -> `error and warning messages`

> - **run.sh.o{{jobid}}**: stdout

Reviewer: `stdout` -> `normal output messages`

> When examining the contents of ``run.sh.o{{jobid}}`` you will see something like this:

Reviewer: Also mention that `run.sh.e*` should be mostly empty (no error messages).

If you remove the `time` from `run.sh` it may even be totally empty?

# Getting Started

Welcome to the "Getting Started" guide. This chapter will lead you through the initial steps of logging into the {{hpcinfra}} and submitting your very first job. We'll also walk you through the process step by step using a practical example.

> In addition to this chapter, you might find this [video](https://www.ugent.be/hpc/en/training/introhpcugent-recording) to be a useful resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to this chapter, you might find the [recording of the *Introduction to HPC-UGent* training session](https://www.ugent.be/hpc/en/training/introhpcugent-recording) to be a useful resource.

> Before proceeding, read [the introduction to HPC](introduction.md) to gain an understanding of the {{ hpcinfra }} and its terminology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before proceeding, read [the introduction to HPC](introduction.md) to gain an understanding of the {{ hpcinfra }} and related terminology.

### Getting Access

> To get access, visit [Getting an HPC Account](account.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get access to the {{hpcinfra}}, visit [Getting an HPC Account](account.md).

If you have not used Linux before, 
{%- if site == 'Gent' %}
now would be a good time to follow our [Linux Tutorial](./only/gent/linux-tutorial/index.md).
{%- else %}
please learn some basics first before continuing. (see [Appendix C - Useful Linux Commands](useful_linux_commands.md))
{%- endif %}

#### A typical workflow looks like this:

1.  Connect to the login nodes 
2.  Transfer your files to the {{hpcinfra}}
3.  Optional: compile your code and test it 
4.  Create a job script and submit your job
5.  Wait for job to be executed
6.  Study the results generated by your jobs, either on the cluster or
    after downloading them locally.

> We will walk through an illustrative workload to get you started. In this example, our objective is to train a deep learning model for recognizing hand-written digits (MNIST dataset).
> See the [example](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/tree/main/examples/tensorflow_mnist).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will walk through an illustrative workload to get you started. In this example, our objective is to train a deep learning model for recognizing hand-written digits (MNIST dataset) using [TensorFlow](https://www.tensorflow.org/);
see the [example scripts](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/tree/main/examples/tensorflow_mnist).
```

### Getting Connected

There are two options to connect

- Using a terminal to connect via SSH (for power users) (see [First Time connection to the {{ hpcinfra}}](connecting.md#first-time-connection-to-the-hpc-infrastructure))

> - [Using the HPC-Ugent web portal](web_portal.md#using-the-hpc-ugent-web-portal)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Using the web portal](web_portal.md#using-the-hpc-ugent-web-portal)
```

Considering your operating system is **{{OS}}**, 

{%- if OS == linux %}

> it's recommented to make use of a terminal with ssh to get the most flexibility. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it's recommented to make use of the `ssh` command in a terminal to get the most flexibility. 
```

> Assuming you've already generated  SSH keys in the previous step ([Getting Access](#getting-access)), you should now be able to login by running the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming you have already generated SSH keys in the previous step ([Getting Access](#getting-access)), and that they are in a default location, you should now be able to login by running the following command:
```

<pre><code>ssh {{userid}}@{{loginnode}}</code></pre>

!!! Warning
    
    Replace <b>{{userid}}</b> with your VSC account id (see <https://account.vscentrum.be>)

!!! Tip

    You can also still use the web portal (see [shell access on web portal](web_portal.md#shell-access))

{%- else %}
{%- if OS == windows %} it's recommended to use the web portal.

> {%- else %} it should be easy to make use of a terminal with ssh, but the web portal will to the trick too: {%- endif %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{%- else %} it should be easy to make use of the `ssh` command in a terminal, but the web portal will work too: {%- endif %}
```

> This platform offers a convenient way to upload files and gain shell access to the {{hpcinfra}} from a standard web browser (no software installation of configuration required).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This platform offers a convenient way to upload files and gain shell access to the {{hpcinfra}} from a standard web browser (no software installation or configuration required).

See [shell access](web_portal.md#shell-access) when using the web portal, or
[connection to the {{hpcinfra}}](connecting.md#first-time-connection-to-the-hpc-infrastructure) when using a terminal.

> Make sure you can get to a shell before proceeding with the next steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure you can get to a shell access to the {{hpcinfra}} before proceeding with the next steps.

{%- endif %}

!!! Info

>     When having problems see the [connection issues](troubleshooting.md#sec:connecting-issues) section on the [troubleshooting page](troubleshooting.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When having problems see the [connection issues section on the troubleshooting page](troubleshooting.md#sec:connecting-issues).

```

### Transfer your files

> Now that you can login, it's time to transfer files from your local computer to your **Home Directory** on a cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you can login, it's time to transfer files from your local computer to your **home directory** on the {{hpcinfra}}.

Download [tensorflow_mnist.py](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/main/examples/tensorflow_mnist/tensorflow_mnist.py) 

> and [run.sh](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/main/examples/tensorflow_mnist/run.sh) from the [example](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/tree/main/examples/tensorflow_mnist) to your computer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Download [tensorflow_mnist.py](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/main/examples/tensorflow_mnist/tensorflow_mnist.py) 
and [run.sh](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/main/examples/tensorflow_mnist/run.sh) example scripts to your computer (from [here](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/tree/main/examples/tensorflow_mnist)).

{%- if OS == windows %}

> The [HPC-Ugent web portal](https://login.hpc.ugent.be) provides a file browser that allows uploading files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [HPC-UGent web portal](https://login.hpc.ugent.be) provides a file browser that allows uploading files.
```

For more information see the [file browser section](web_portal.md#file-browser).

> Upload both files (`run.sh` and `tensorflow-mnist.py`) to your **Home Directory** and go back to your shell.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Upload both files (`run.sh` and `tensorflow-mnist.py`) to your **home directory** and go back to your shell.
```

!!! Info

    As an alternative, you can use WinSCP (see [our section](connecting.md#winscp))

{%- else %}

On your local machine you can run:
<pre><code>curl -OL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/main/examples/tensorflow_mnist/tensorflow_mnist.py
curl -OL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/main/examples/tensorflow_mnist/run.sh
</code></pre>

Using the `scp` command, the files can be copied from your local host to your *home directory* (`~`) on the remote host (HPC).

> <pre><code>scp tensorflow_mnist.py run.sh {{userid}}{{ loginnode }}:~ </code></pre>

Reviewer: better repeat the warning about changing `vsc40000` here again?

<pre><code>ssh  {{userid}}@{{ loginnode }} </code></pre>

!!! Info

    For more information about transfering files or `scp`, see [tranfer files from/to hpc](connecting.md#transfer-files-tofrom-the-hpc).

{%- endif %}

> When running `ls` in your session on the {{hpcinfra}}, you should see the two files listed:
> 
> ```shell
> $ ls
> run.sh tensorflow_mnist.py
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running `ls` in your session on the {{hpcinfra}}, you should see the two files listed in your home directory (`~`):

```shell
$ ls ~
run.sh tensorflow_mnist.py
```

!!! Warning

>     When you do not see these files, make sure you uploaded the files to your **Home Directory**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When you do not see these files, make sure you uploaded the files to your **home directory**.
```

### Submitting a job

Jobs are submitted and executed using job scripts. In our case **run.sh** can be used as a (very minimal) job script.

A job script is a shell script, a text file that specifies the resources, 
the software that is used (via `module load` statements), 
and the steps that should be executed to run the calculation.

Our job script looks like this:

<center>-- run.sh --</center>

```bash
#!/bin/bash

module load TensorFlow/2.11.0-foss-2022a

time python tensorflow_mnist.py

```

> <sub>As you can see this job script will run the Python script: **tensorflow_mnist.py**</sub>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<sub>As you can see this job script will run the Python script named **tensorflow_mnist.py**.</sub>

The jobs you submit are per default executed on **cluser/{{defaultcluster}}**, you can swap to another cluster by issuing the following command.

```shell
module swap cluster/{{othercluster}}
```

!!! Tip
    
    When submitting jobs with limited amount of resources, it is recommended to use the [debug/interactive cluster](interactive_debug.md#interactive-and-debug-cluster): `donphan`. 

{%- if site == 'Gent' %}

    To get a list of all clusters and their hardware, see <https://www.ugent.be/hpc/en/infrastructure>.

{%- endif %}

This job script can now be submitted to the cluster's job system for execution, using the qsub (**q**ueue **sub**mit) command:

```shell
$ qsub run.sh
{{jobid}}
```

This command returns a job identifier (*{{jobid}}*) on the HPC cluster. This is a unique identifier for the job which can be used to monitor and manage your job.

!!! Warning
 

>     Please take note that the module commands exclusively modify environment variables. For instance, using `module swap cluster/{{othercluster}}` will instruct `qsub` to submit the job to the {{othercluster}} cluster, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Note that the module commands only modify environment variables. For instance, running `module swap cluster/{{othercluster}}` will update your shell environment so that `qsub` submits a job to the {{othercluster}} cluster, 
```

    but our active shell session is still running on the login node.
    

>     It is important to understand that while `module` commands affect your session environment, they do <b style="color:orange">not</b> change where the commands your are running are being executed: they will still be run on the login node you are on.

Reviewer: I wouldn't use color here, but use bold + italic via `***`

```suggestion
    It is important to understand that while `module` commands affect your session environment, they do ***not*** change where the commands your are running are being executed: they will still be run on the login node you are on.
```

>     But when submitting a job script, the commands <b style="color:orange">in</b> the job script will be run on a workernode of the cluster the job was submitted to (like `{{othercluster}}`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When you submit a job script however, the commands ***in*** the job script will be run on a workernode of the cluster the job was submitted to (like `{{othercluster}}`).

For detailed information about `module` commands, read the [running batch jobs](running_batch_jobs.md) chapter.

### Wait for job to be executed

> Your job is first put into a queue before being executed, so it can take a while.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your job is put into a queue before being executed, so it may take a while before it actually starts.

<pre><code>$ qstat
Job ID     Name             User            Time Use S Queue
---------- ---------------- --------------- -------- - -------
{{jobid}}     run.sh           {{userid}}        0:00:00  <b style="color:orange">Q</b> {{othercluster}}
</code></pre> 

Eventually, after entering `qstat` again you should see that your job has started running:
<pre><code>$ qstat
Job ID     Name             User            Time Use S Queue
---------- ---------------- --------------- -------- - -------
{{jobid}}     run.sh           {{userid}}        0:00:01  <b style="color:green">R</b> {{othercluster}}
</code></pre> 

If you don't see your job in the output of the `qstat` command anymore, your job has likely completed.

Read [this section](running_batch_jobs.md#monitoring-and-managing-your-jobs) on how to interpret the output.

### Inspect your results

When your job finishes it generates 2 output files:

- One for normal output messages (*stdout* output channel).
- One for warning and error messages (*stderr* output channel).

By default located in the directory where you issued `qsub`.

{%- if site == 'Gent' %}

!!! Info

>     For more information about standard input/output, see this [section](./only/gent/linux-tutorial/beyond_the_basics.md#inputoutput).

Reviewer: For more information about the `stdout` and `stderr` output channels, see this [section](./only/gent/linux-tutorial/beyond_the_basics.md#inputoutput).

{%- endif %}

In our example when running <code>ls</code> in the current directory you should see 2 new files:
 
- **run.sh.o{{jobid}}**: normal output messages

> - **run.sh.e{{jobid}}**: error and warning messages

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **run.sh.o{{jobid}}**, containing normal output messages produced by job {{jobid}};
- **run.sh.e{{jobid}}**, containing error and warning messages produced by job {{jobid}}.

!!! Info
    

>     run.sh.e{{jobid}} should be mostly empty (no error messages). If you remove the `time` command from `run.sh`, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    `run.sh.e{{jobid}}` should be mostly empty (no error messages). If you remove the `time` command from `run.sh`,
```

It probably makes more sense to drop the `time` command from the script, so you can simply state here that the `.e` file should be totally empty (no errors or warnings produced by the job).

>     it should contain only tensorflow warnings or nothing at all.

Reviewer: `tensorflow` -> `TensorFlow`

When examining the contents of ``run.sh.o{{jobid}}`` you will see something like this:
```
Downloading data from https://storage.googleapis.com/tensorflow/tf-keras-datasets/mnist.npz
11493376/11490434 [==============================] - 1s 0us/step
Epoch 1/5
1875/1875 [==============================] - 2s 823us/step - loss: 0.2960 - accuracy: 0.9133
Epoch 2/5
1875/1875 [==============================] - 1s 771us/step - loss: 0.1427 - accuracy: 0.9571
Epoch 3/5
1875/1875 [==============================] - 1s 767us/step - loss: 0.1070 - accuracy: 0.9675
Epoch 4/5
1875/1875 [==============================] - 1s 764us/step - loss: 0.0881 - accuracy: 0.9727
Epoch 5/5
1875/1875 [==============================] - 1s 764us/step - loss: 0.0741 - accuracy: 0.9768
313/313 - 0s - loss: 0.0782 - accuracy: 0.9764
```

Hurray 🎉, we trained a deep learning model and achieved 97,64 percent accuracy.

!!! Warning

>     You should run tensorflow calculations on GPUs on a GPU cluster for better performance, see [GPU clusters](gpu.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    When using TensorFlow specifically, you should actually submit jobs to a GPU cluster for better performance, see [GPU clusters](gpu.md).

    For the purpose of this example, we are running a very small TensorFlow workload on a CPU-only cluster.

{%- if site == 'Gent' %}
now would be a good time to follow our [Linux Tutorial](./only/gent/linux-tutorial/index.md).
{%- else %}
please learn some basics first before continuing. (see [Appendix C - Useful Linux Commands](useful_linux_commands.md))
{%- endif %}

#### A typical workflow looks like this:

1.  Connect to the login nodes 
2.  Transfer your files to the {{hpcinfra}}
3.  Optional: compile your code and test it 
4.  Create a job script and submit your job
5.  Wait for job to be executed
6.  Study the results generated by your jobs, either on the cluster or
    after downloading them locally.

We will walk through an illustrative workload to get you started. In this example, our objective is to train a deep learning model for recognizing hand-written digits (MNIST dataset) using [TensorFlow](https://www.tensorflow.org/);
see the [example scripts](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/tree/main/{{exampleloc}}).

### Getting Connected

There are two options to connect

- Using a terminal to connect via SSH (for power users) (see [First Time connection to the {{ hpcinfra}}](connecting.md#first-time-connection-to-the-hpc-infrastructure))

> - [Using the web portal](web_portal.md#using-the-hpc-ugent-web-portal)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Using the web portal](web_portal.md)

Considering your operating system is **{{OS}}**, 

{%- if OS == linux %}

> it's recommented to make use of the `ssh` command in a terminal to get the most flexibility. 

Reviewer: typo:

```suggestion
it' is recommended to make use of the `ssh` command in a terminal to get the most flexibility. 
```

Assuming you have already generated SSH keys in the previous step ([Getting Access](#getting-access)), and that they are in a default location, you should now be able to login by running the following command:

<pre><code>ssh {{userid}}@{{loginnode}}</code></pre>

!!! Warning
    
    Replace <b>{{userid}}</b> with your VSC account id (see <https://account.vscentrum.be>)

!!! Tip

    You can also still use the web portal (see [shell access on web portal](web_portal.md#shell-access))

{%- else %}

> {%- if OS == windows %} it's recommended to use the web portal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{%- if OS == windows %} it is recommended to use the web portal.
```

> {%- else %} it should be easy to make use of the `ssh` command in a terminal, but the web portal will work too: {%- endif %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{%- else %} it should be easy to make use of the `ssh` command in a terminal, but the web portal will work too. {%- endif %}

> This platform offers a convenient way to upload files and gain shell access to the {{hpcinfra}} from a standard web browser (no software installation or configuration required).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [web portal](web_portal.md) offers a convenient way to upload files and gain shell access to the {{hpcinfra}} from a standard web browser (no software installation or configuration required).

See [shell access](web_portal.md#shell-access) when using the web portal, or
[connection to the {{hpcinfra}}](connecting.md#first-time-connection-to-the-hpc-infrastructure) when using a terminal.

Make sure you can get to a shell access to the {{hpcinfra}} before proceeding with the next steps.

{%- endif %}

!!! Info

    When having problems see the [connection issues section on the troubleshooting page](troubleshooting.md#sec:connecting-issues).

### Transfer your files

> Now that you can login, it's time to transfer files from your local computer to your **home directory** on the {{hpcinfra}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you can login, it is time to transfer files from your local computer to your **home directory** on the {{hpcinfra}}.

For more information see the [file browser section](web_portal.md#file-browser).

Upload both files (`run.sh` and `tensorflow-mnist.py`) to your **home directory** and go back to your shell.

!!! Info

    As an alternative, you can use WinSCP (see [our section](connecting.md#winscp))

{%- else %}

On your local machine you can run:
<pre><code>curl -OL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/main/{{exampleloc}}/tensorflow_mnist.py
curl -OL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/main/{{exampleloc}}/run.sh
</code></pre>

Using the `scp` command, the files can be copied from your local host to your *home directory* (`~`) on the remote host (HPC).
<pre><code>scp tensorflow_mnist.py run.sh {{userid}}{{ loginnode }}:~ </code></pre>
<pre><code>ssh  {{userid}}@{{ loginnode }} </code></pre>

!!! Warning
    
    Replace <b>{{userid}}</b> with your VSC account id (see <https://account.vscentrum.be>)

!!! Info

    For more information about transfering files or `scp`, see [tranfer files from/to hpc](connecting.md#transfer-files-tofrom-the-hpc).

{%- endif %}

> When running `ls` in your session on the {{hpcinfra}}, you should see the two files listed in your home directory(`~`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When running `ls` in your session on the {{hpcinfra}}, you should see the two files listed in your home directory (`~`):

Our job script looks like this:

<center>-- run.sh --</center>

```bash
#!/bin/bash

module load TensorFlow/2.11.0-foss-2022a

python tensorflow_mnist.py

```
<sub>As you can see this job script will run the Python script named **tensorflow_mnist.py**.</sub>

The jobs you submit are per default executed on **cluser/{{defaultcluster}}**, you can swap to another cluster by issuing the following command.

```shell
module swap cluster/{{othercluster}}
```

!!! Tip
    
    When submitting jobs with limited amount of resources, it is recommended to use the [debug/interactive cluster](interactive_debug.md#interactive-and-debug-cluster): `donphan`. 

{%- if site == 'Gent' %}

    To get a list of all clusters and their hardware, see <https://www.ugent.be/hpc/en/infrastructure>.

{%- endif %}

This job script can now be submitted to the cluster's job system for execution, using the qsub (**q**ueue **sub**mit) command:

```shell
$ qsub run.sh
{{jobid}}
```

This command returns a job identifier (*{{jobid}}*) on the HPC cluster. This is a unique identifier for the job which can be used to monitor and manage your job.

!!! Warning
 

>     Note that the module commands only modify environment variables. For instance, running `module swap cluster/{{othercluster}}` will update your shell environment so that `qsub` submits a job to the {{othercluster}} cluster, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Note that the module commands only modify environment variables. For instance, running `module swap cluster/{{othercluster}}` will update your shell environment so that `qsub` submits a job to the `{{othercluster}}` cluster,

    but our active shell session is still running on the login node.
    
    It is important to understand that while `module` commands affect your session environment, they do ***not*** change where the commands your are running are being executed: they will still be run on the login node you are on.
    
    When you submit a job script however, the commands ***in*** the job script will be run on a workernode of the cluster the job was submitted to (like `{{othercluster}}`).

For detailed information about `module` commands, read the [running batch jobs](running_batch_jobs.md) chapter.

### Wait for job to be executed

Your job is put into a queue before being executed, so it may take a while before it actually starts.

> (see [when will my job start?](running_batch_jobs.md#when-will-my-job-start) for scheduling policy)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(see [when will my job start?](running_batch_jobs.md#when-will-my-job-start) for scheduling policy).

<pre><code>$ qstat
Job ID     Name             User            Time Use S Queue
---------- ---------------- --------------- -------- - -------
{{jobid}}     run.sh           {{userid}}        0:00:01  <b style="color:green">R</b> {{othercluster}}
</code></pre> 

If you don't see your job in the output of the `qstat` command anymore, your job has likely completed.

Read [this section](running_batch_jobs.md#monitoring-and-managing-your-jobs) on how to interpret the output.

### Inspect your results

When your job finishes it generates 2 output files:

- One for normal output messages (*stdout* output channel).
- One for warning and error messages (*stderr* output channel).

By default located in the directory where you issued `qsub`.

{%- if site == 'Gent' %}

!!! Info

    For more information about the stdout and stderr output channels, see this [section](./only/gent/linux-tutorial/beyond_the_basics.md#inputoutput).

{%- endif %}

In our example when running <code>ls</code> in the current directory you should see 2 new files:
 
- **run.sh.o{{jobid}}**, containing normal output messages produced by job {{jobid}};

> - **run.sh.e{{jobid}}**, containing error and warning messages produced by job {{jobid}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **run.sh.o{{jobid}}**, containing *normal output messages* produced by job {{jobid}};
- **run.sh.e{{jobid}}**, containing *errors and warnings* produced by job {{jobid}}.

Reviewer: We should probably also add a warning box here that the example job ID `123456` should be replaced by the actual job ID of the submitted job?

5.  Wait for job to be executed
6.  Study the results generated by your jobs, either on the cluster or
    after downloading them locally.

We will walk through an illustrative workload to get you started. In this example, our objective is to train a deep learning model for recognizing hand-written digits (MNIST dataset) using [TensorFlow](https://www.tensorflow.org/);
see the [example scripts](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/tree/main/{{exampleloc}}).

### Getting Connected

There are two options to connect

- Using a terminal to connect via SSH (for power users) (see [First Time connection to the {{ hpcinfra}}](connecting.md#first-time-connection-to-the-hpc-infrastructure))
- [Using the web portal](web_portal.md)

Considering your operating system is **{{OS}}**, 

{%- if OS == linux %}
it is recommended to make use of the `ssh` command in a terminal to get the most flexibility. 

Assuming you have already generated SSH keys in the previous step ([Getting Access](#getting-access)), and that they are in a default location, you should now be able to login by running the following command:

<pre><code>ssh {{userid}}@{{loginnode}}</code></pre>

> !!! Warning "User your own userid"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! Warning "User your own VSC account id"

and [run.sh](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/main/{{exampleloc}}/run.sh) example scripts to your computer (from [here](https://github.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/tree/main/{{exampleloc}})).

{%- if OS == windows %}

The [HPC-UGent web portal](https://login.hpc.ugent.be) provides a file browser that allows uploading files.
For more information see the [file browser section](web_portal.md#file-browser).

Upload both files (`run.sh` and `tensorflow-mnist.py`) to your **home directory** and go back to your shell.

!!! Info

    As an alternative, you can use WinSCP (see [our section](connecting.md#winscp))

{%- else %}

On your local machine you can run:
<pre><code>curl -OL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/main/{{exampleloc}}/tensorflow_mnist.py
curl -OL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/hpcugent/vsc_user_docs/main/{{exampleloc}}/run.sh
</code></pre>

Using the `scp` command, the files can be copied from your local host to your *home directory* (`~`) on the remote host (HPC).
<pre><code>scp tensorflow_mnist.py run.sh {{userid}}{{ loginnode }}:~ </code></pre>
<pre><code>ssh  {{userid}}@{{ loginnode }} </code></pre>

> !!! Warning "Use your own user id"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! Warning "User your own VSC account id"

and the steps that should be executed to run the calculation.

Our job script looks like this:

<center>-- run.sh --</center>

```bash
#!/bin/bash

module load TensorFlow/2.11.0-foss-2022a

python tensorflow_mnist.py

```
<sub>As you can see this job script will run the Python script named **tensorflow_mnist.py**.</sub>

The jobs you submit are per default executed on **cluser/{{defaultcluster}}**, you can swap to another cluster by issuing the following command.

```shell
module swap cluster/{{othercluster}}
```

!!! Tip
    
    When submitting jobs with limited amount of resources, it is recommended to use the [debug/interactive cluster](interactive_debug.md#interactive-and-debug-cluster): `donphan`. 

{%- if site == 'Gent' %}

    To get a list of all clusters and their hardware, see <https://www.ugent.be/hpc/en/infrastructure>.

{%- endif %}

This job script can now be submitted to the cluster's job system for execution, using the qsub (**q**ueue **sub**mit) command:

```shell
$ qsub run.sh
{{jobid}}
```

This command returns a job identifier (*{{jobid}}*) on the HPC cluster. This is a unique identifier for the job which can be used to monitor and manage your job.

> !!! Warning "Make sure you understand the `module` command"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! Warning "Make sure you understand what the `module` command does"

{{jobid}}     run.sh           {{userid}}        0:00:01  <b style="color:green">R</b> {{othercluster}}
</code></pre> 

If you don't see your job in the output of the `qstat` command anymore, your job has likely completed.

Read [this section](running_batch_jobs.md#monitoring-and-managing-your-jobs) on how to interpret the output.

### Inspect your results

When your job finishes it generates 2 output files:

- One for normal output messages (*stdout* output channel).
- One for warning and error messages (*stderr* output channel).

By default located in the directory where you issued `qsub`.

{%- if site == 'Gent' %}

!!! Info

    For more information about the stdout and stderr output channels, see this [section](./only/gent/linux-tutorial/beyond_the_basics.md#inputoutput).

{%- endif %}

In our example when running <code>ls</code> in the current directory you should see 2 new files:
 
- **run.sh.o{{jobid}}**, containing *normal output messages* produced by job {{jobid}};
- **run.sh.e{{jobid}}**, containing *errors and warnings* produced by job {{jobid}}.

!!! Info
    
    run.sh.e{{jobid}} should be empty (no errors or warnings).

> !!! Warning "Use correct jobid"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! Warning "Use your own job ID"
